First up: he is a visiting Professor of Economics at The New School University and
the author of Democracy at Work, please welcome Richard D. Wolff.
Professor? How are you, Professor?
[WOLFF] Pretty good. [MAHER] Thank you so much for being here.
I'll tell you why you're here. I did a story on the show a couple of weeks ago
I read in USA Today that they had crunched these
numbers and found out that to reach the "American Dream," the typical American Dream,
they weren't asking for the world,
you know, a vacation, a car - not two cars -
maybe go out to dinner once a week...not crazy stuff
It would cost a family of four $130,000/year just to live like that.
And the median income is $51,000 - to say nothing of the people who probably make less than that.
$51,000 to $130,000...how do we close that gap?
[WOLFF] Well, I think the first thing to face is that it means, as the article said
that only 1 out of 8 American households is able to have the "American Dream" right now.
That we now live in an economic system that is saying to 7 out of 8 American families: "Not for you anymore."
You know, when I was a young man, we were told in school that capitalism was a great system
because it created and sustained a big middle class; that was a virtue.
Well, if that applies, then we have to face the fact that we now have a system that can't do that.
That has denied that to the larger number of our people.
And that raises the question: can't we do better than this?
Can't we do something about an economic system to make it work better?
[MAHER] And how do we do that? I mean, I know that you're a Marxist, right? I mean you actually were-
[WOLFF] No horns.
[MAHER] No horns. And that's got to be one of the frustrating things about being a Marxist
is that right away when you say that word in America, people get hysterical. It's just an economic system.
I mean, I don't think I'm a Marxist, but tell me why you are and why it's not scary.
[WOLFF] Well, you know, it's really kind of simple.
When capitalism developed in the world back in the 18th century in England and spread to Europe and then to us-
[MAHER] England is in Europe. [WOLFF] That's true - the rest of Europe.
[MAHER] And I'm not a big time Professor. Alright, go ahead.
[WOLFF] Anyway, when it did spread that way, it kind of had a commitment, if you want, to develop the world and grow things.
And it had theorists who celebrated it:  Adam Smith, David Ricardo, the famous theorists-
[MAHER] The invisible hand.
[WOLFF] Exactly. They looked at capitalism, they loved it, and they analyzed it.
But then along came this other guy: Karl Marx, a little bit later.
He looked at it and said basically: we can do better.
And he developed an analysis based on that approach.
And for me, as I think it ought to be for any rational person, you study the system based on the thinking
of the people who love it, but you also look at the thinking of the people who are critical of it.
And then you come to your own judgement.
We've been a nation - and it's my whole life experience in the United States - that has been hesitatant to do that.
Doesn't want to weigh the two sides.
Wants to be the celebrator all the time, and never look at the side of the criticism.
And I think when we grow up as a nation, it's time to look at that part of the way capitalism works
that is understood by the critics. And Marx was just a critic. That's all.
[MAHER] So you don't think what happened with communism was Marxism?
I mean, you don't think we already discredited that system?
Because my theory - and of course, again, I'm not really a Professor of Economics, although I play one on TV -
is that my analogy is: a rushing river.
You know, rivers only go in one direction.
The Chinese actually tried to - or maybe they did - changed the course of rivers. They moved them.
Now that's quite an exercise in hubris, when you think you can make the river flow backwards.
To me institutions have to be grafted on the way human nature really is.
You have to go with the flow of the river. Human nature is greedy, and selfish.
Capitalism, I think, is the system that takes advantage of that. I just say put dams and locks on the rivers
but don't try to make the river flow in the opposite direction, which is what I think is what Marxism does.
[WOLFF] Well I think what happened is that people got excited about Marxism and took it in directions that we don't want to go in again. We have to learn from that.
But people have done that with almost any system of thought
including the lovers of democracy, the lovers of capitalism...
Some of them did things that in the name of that that we don't agree with, and we want to learn what not to do.
And I think the Soviet Union, China and so on, give us lessons in what not to do.
But Marx was not a thinker about socialism and communism - never wrote a book about it.
His analysis was about capital.
And he was interested in understanding what about it is positive and what about it isn't so positive.
And how can we go further?
I use this simple analogy:
If you wanted to understand a family down the street: mother, father, couple of kids
and one kid thought it was the greatest family ever; and the other kid said it was a disaster.
If you wanted to understand the family you'd want to talk to both kids.
It's not a question of which one is right or wrong.
But you want the understanding of the celebrator and you want the understanding of the critic.
Marxism, in the way that Marx wrote about, is the analysis of capitalism from the perspective of a critic.
And I think we would only be better off if we had followed a little bit of that
so we would understand better the problems of capitalism.
We would handle them a bit better.
[MAHER] I'm wondering if any system...
I'm wondering if there's any system that
really is going to work in the future
when it seems like workers are facing
this storm of (1) automation, they can't stop that,
robots take people's jobs,
and (2) when they don't, it's people in countries overseas who work for a fraction of
what people will work for here in America. I mean, that's only going to get worse.
How are we going to deal with that?
[WOLFF] Well, I think that's very crucial to understand how how serious that has been.
You know the early histories of capitalism in our country, in other parts of the world the last 200 years
we built up the industry in North America, Western Europe, Japan; those places.
Capitalists made money there and they built their industries there
but the logic of capitalism, which is to make a buck, to make as many bucks as you can,
has now in the last 30 years said:
"Why are we doing this in the countries of North America, Western Europe, where the wages are pretty high?
Where the workers have struggled successfully to have a "middle class"?
We don't want that anymore. We can do much better with a modern jet engine, with modern telecommunications.
We can produce far away in China and India and Brazil paying a tiny fraction of the wages.
And boy are we going to make a lot of money."
And that's what they've been doing, and that's what they're going to continue to do.
And it means that the old centers of capitalism - us - are in a position of being abandoned
by the very system that brought us up but is now moving on.
And if we don't do something as a nation to hold that in, to prevent that from continuing,
we're looking at a situation in which cities like Detroit and Cleveland that we now see as such problems
are going to become much more typical of our country than even they are now.
And I find that a very scary proposition.
And I'm doubly scared by the fact that we seem to be a nation that is wary of confronting the problems of capitalism
because we have this history of a one-sided celebration.
[MAHER] I think Cleveland's doing okay.
Thank you, doc, I appreciate you coming by.
[WOLFF] Thank you very much.
[MAHER] Detroit's in trouble, I'll give you that one...